This chapter describe how LatAnalyze handles errors and how you can 
control and customize this handling. The objects described in this 
chapter are declared in the header file @file{latan/error.h}.

@menu
* Error codes::
* Error handler::
@end menu

@node Error codes, Error handler, , Error handling
@section Error codes
@cindex error codes
@tindex latan_errno
Almost every function of LatAnalyze that can raise an error return 
an error code as an integer. For more clarity, all possible error 
codes are enumerated in the @code{latan_errno} type. The error codes
from -1 to 32 are compatibles with @acronym{GSL} error codes.
Here follow the list and the meaning of these error codes.
@deftypevr Macro int LATAN_FAILURE @code{= -1}
General failure; used to indicate an error for functions that must 
return a positive integer result.
@end deftypevr
@deftypevr Macro int LATAN_SUCCESS @code{= 0}
Success; used to indicate that the function call was done without error.
@end deftypevr
@deftypevr Macro int LATAN_EDOM @code{= 1}
Domain error; used to indicate that a mathematic function was call with
an argument out of its definition domain.
@end deftypevr
@deftypevr Macro int LATAN_EFAULT @code{= 3}
Invalid pointer; used to indicate that an invalid pointer (like
@code{NULL}) was encountered during the function call.
@end deftypevr
@deftypevr Macro int LATAN_EINVAL @code{= 4}
Invalid argument; used when an invalid argument was specified by
user (@i{e.g.} unknown flag).
@end deftypevr
@deftypevr Macro int LATAN_ENOMEM @code{= 8}
@code{malloc} call failed; used when a @code{NULL} pointer is obtained after an
allocation request, in almost all cases it means that the system is
out of memory.
@end deftypevr

@node Error handler, , Error codes, Error handling
@section Error handler
@cindex error handler
The error handler is the function used by LatAnalyze to report errors.
Its default behaviour is to print an error message and then abort
the program. User can use its own function to handle LatAnalyze errors
using the following functions. A error handler function must have the
@code{latan_error_handler_t} type defined in @file{latan/error.h}, this
header is already included in all other LatAnalyze headers.
@deftp{Function type} latan_error_handler_t
A function of type @code{latan_error_handler_t} is a function that have
the following prototype :
@example
void handler(const char * reason,
             const char * file,
             int line,
             int no)
@end example
@end deftp

@deftypefun {latan_error_handler_t *} latan_set_error_handler (latan_error_handler_t* new_handler)
This function set the error handler to @var{new_handler} and return
the previous one.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun {latan_error_handler_t *} latan_set_error_handler_off (void)
This function desactivate LatAnalyze error handler and return the 
current handler.
@end deftypefun

